See, the problem is like with all this, the living by principles,
living in principle life,
focusing on relationships and kind of thinking of this life as this perfect
thing, kind of forgets the notion that none of it, you know,
makes any sense, right? Like the,
like it kind of implies that this is like a video game and you want
to get a high score as opposed to none of this even makes sense.
Like, why would he like what that, like,
like what does it even mean to die is going to be over?
It's like everything I do, all of these productivity hacks, all this life,
all these efforts,
all this creative efforts kind of assume it's going to go on forever.
There's a kind of a sense of immortality and I don't even know how to
intellectually makes sense that it ends. Uh, of course,
got to ask you in that context, what do you think is the meaning of it all,
especially for computer scientists. I mean, there's gotta be some mathematical.
Yeah. 27 or what's the Douglas Adams. Yeah,
42. Okay. 27 is a better number. I should read more Spotify, um, a.
Year onto something with a 27.
I don't wanna give away too much, but just trust me 27 divisible.
Yeah. Um.
So I mean, I don't know, obviously, right. I mean I'm hoping would, yeah, I,
I don't know, but,
but going back to what you were saying about the sort of the existentialist or
sort of the more nihilist style approach, the one thing that,
that there is, are intimations, right? So there's these
intimations to human halves of somehow this feels right, and this feels wrong.
This feels good. This feels like I'm doing, I mean, aligned with something,
you know, when I'm acting with courage to save whatever, right. It's not,
these intimations are grounding against arbitrary ness.
Like one of the ideas I'm really interested in is that, uh,
when you look at religion, right? So I'm, I'm, I'm,
I'm interested in world religions for, for my, my grandfather was a, uh,
like a theologian that studied and wrote all these books.
And I'm very interested in this type of stuff. And there's this great book.
That's, it's, it's not, um, specific to a particular religion,
but as Karen Armstrong wrote this great book called the case for God,
she's very interesting.
She was a Catholic nun who sort of left that religion and is,
but one of the smartest thinkers, uh,
in terms of like accessible theological thinking,
that's not tied to any particular religion, her whole argument,
is that the way to understand religion? You, you, first of all,
you have to go way back pre enlightenment, where all this was formed.
We got messed up thinking about religion. Post-enlightenment right. And, and,
um, these were operating systems for making sense of intimations.
The one thing we had are these different inflammations of this field,
like awe and mystical experience.
And this feels some there's something you feel when you act in a certain way and
don't act in this other way.
And it was like the scientists who were trying to study and understand the model
of the atom by just looking at experiments,
trying to understand what's going on, like the,
the great religions of the world.
We're basically figuring out how do we make sense of these informations and live
in alignment with them and build a life of meaning around that?
What were the tools they were using? They were using ritual.
They were using belief. They were using action,
but all of it was like an O S it was like a,
a liturgical model of the atom that did that.
That's hard coded in. So it did, uh, through the evolutionary process.
But I mean, they wouldn't have called it that back then, or, yeah. I mean,
whether they'd said they didn't have that, it was pre enlightenment.
And if they just say this is here and the directive is to try to live in
alignment with that. Well.
Then I want to ask who wrote the original code? Yeah.
So question. Yeah. So,
so Armstrong lays out this good argument and where it gets really interesting is
that, that she emphasizes that all of this was considered an ethical, right?
So the, the whole notion,
and this is like rich and Jewish tradition in particular,
and also in Islamic tradition, we can't comprehend it,
understand what's going on here. Right?
And so the best we can do to approximate understanding and live in alignment as
we like act as if this is true, do these rituals have these actions or whatever.
Post-enlightenment a lot of that got, once we learned about enlightenment,
we grew these suspicions around religions that are very much of the modern era,
right? So like the, the Karen Armstrong lake, uh,
Sam Harris's critique of religion makes no sense, right?
Th th the critiques based on, well,
this is you're making the assent to propositions that you think are true for
what you do not have evidence that they are true. So like,
that's an enlightenment thing, right? This is not the context. And this is not,
the religion is the Rutherford model of the atom. Like, it's not actually,
maybe what is underneath happening,
but this model explains while your chemical equations work.
And so this is like the way religion was you, you, there's a,
God we'll call it this. This is how it works. We do this ritual.
We act in this way, it aligns with it just like the model the Adam predicted,
Y you know, in a and C L is going to become salt.
This predicts that you're going to feel and live in alignment. Right.
It's like this beautiful, sophisticated theory,
which actually matches how a lot of great theologians have, you know,
thought about it. Um, but then when you come forward in time, yeah.
Maybe it's evolution. I mean, this is like what Peterson hints at, right. Like,
he's basically, he's not,
he doesn't like to get super pinned down on this, but, um,
it's kind of seems where he's.
Like searching for the.
Words. He focuses more on like young and other people. But, uh, I mean,
I know he's very union, but, but that same type of analysis,
I think roughly speaking, like Armstrong is sort of a,
it's kind of like a Peter Sonian analysis,
but she's looking more at the deep history of religion than, uh, but yeah,
he throws in an evolutionary.
I wonder what it finds.
I wonder what the new home is if religion dissipates and what the new home for
these kinds of natural inclinations are. Uh, yeah. Well,
this technology.
And if it's evolution, I mean, this is Francis Collins, his book also,
he's like, well, that's a religious, that could be a very religious notion.
I think this stuff is interesting. I'm not a very religious person, but I'm, uh,
I'm thinking it's not about idea. Maybe, maybe what replaces, honestly,
like maybe what replaces religion is a return to religion,
but in this sort of more sophisticated, I mean, if you went back. Yeah. I mean,
it's the issue with like a lot of the, the recent critiques, I think is a,
it's a, it's a strawman critique in a complicated way, right?
Because th th the whole way, these, the way this work, I mean, the theologians,
if you're reading Paul Tillich, if you're reading Heschel,
if you're reading these people, they're,
they're thinking very sophisticated about religion in terms of this,
it's an affable, and we're just these things,
and this is a steep connects us to these things in a way that puts life in
alignment. We can't really explain what's going on because we're, we,
our brains can't handle it. Right. Um, for the average person, though,
this notion of live as if it's kind of how religions work is Liz live as if this
is true, it's like an a N O S for getting in alignment with it, because we,
through cultural evolution, like you behave in this way,
do these original live as if this is true. Um, gives you the,
what the goal you're looking for,
but that's a complicated thing live as if this is true, because if you,
especially, if you're not a theologian to say, uh, yeah,
this is not true in an alignment sense,
but I'm living as if it kind of takes the heat out of it. But of course,
it's what people are doing because, you know,
highly religious people still do bad things where if you really were, you know,
there's absolutely a hell and I'm definitely gonna go to it.
If I do this bad thing, you would never have, you know,
no one would ever murder anyone if they were a evangelical Christian. Right. So,
so it's like what? This is kind of a tangent that I'm, um,
I'm on shaky ground here,
but it's something I've been interested in off and on a lot.
Was this fast. I mean, I think we're in some sense searching for, because it is,
it does make for a good operating system.
We're searching for a good live as if X is true and we're searching for a new X.
Yeah. And maybe artificial intelligence will be the very,
the new gods that we're so desperately looking.
For. Or it'll just spit out 42.
I thought it was 27. This is a, as you know, I've been a huge fan.
Uh, so are a huge number of people that I've spoken with.
So they telling me, I absolutely have to talk to you. This was a huge honor.
This was really fun. Thanks for wasting all this time with me. Likewise.
I'm been a longtime fan. So this was a great lot of fun. Yeah. Thanks man.